---
title: conda - a virtual environment manager
layout: post
tags:
  - programming
  - linux
---

## what is conda

- `conda` is a python package, written in python
- it helps you to create virtual environments

## how is it different ?

- **Python** - In `conda` you can also chose the version of the python you want.
  It will then download the version of python that you asked for
  and then install it for your virtual environment.
- **Channels** - Conda channels are the locations where packages are stored.
  You can have multiple channels from where you can get
  packages, and you can set there priority. Also they are prebuilt
  packages, so you won't have to compile the whole package yourself.
  Some famous channels are - `conda-forge` `anaconda`
- **History/Revisions** - whenever you make some change to the environment
  it is stored as a revision to the environment, and if you want to revert
  back to a previous revision you can do that.

## how to install packages ?

In `conda` environment you can install packages using normal `pip`,
that will download the latest version of packages that your
according the python you selected.

To install packages using conda you can use `conda install pkgname`.
This will install packages form the conda repository.
There are `channels` in conda, each channel is connected to a
specific repository for packages.

## what happens when you do `conda install`

When you do conda install, conda first look for the channels to
which it have to search in, then it check for other dependencies and conflicts
and find a suitable match which package to install, which package to upgrade
and which to downgrade to meet the user need. This take more time if the
metadata is more and more packages are installed in an environment through conda.
So it is advised to install all the packages in the starting when creating an
environment.

## some examples

- `conda activate` - activate the default base environment
- `conda activate envname` - activate the `envname` environment
- `conda deactivate` - deactivate the active environment
- `conda config --set auto_activate_base false` - this will create a `.condarc` file
  in the home directory and then add this option there. This option
  will stop the base environment form activating automatically
  every time you start a shell.
- `conda create --name env` - create a environment with name env
- `conda create -n temp python=3.4` - crete a env temp with python 3.4 version
- `conda list` - List linked packages in a conda environment.
- `conda info` - Display information about current conda install.
- `conda info -e` - Display information about all the conda env.
- `conda install -c channel-name pkg` install `pkg` form channel `channel-name`
- `conda install ipykernel` - install ipykernel in current env so we can open it in jupiter notebook.
- `conda update --all --yes` - update all packages
- `conda remove --name env --all` - remove `env` package
- `conda config --show channels` - show list of channels for current env
- `conda config --show default_channels` - show default channels
- `conda config --add channels channel-name` - add channel `channel-name` to current env
- `conda config --get channels` - show channels and there priority also.
- `conda config --set channel_priority strict` - set the channel priority to strict
- `conda list --revision` - show the list of revisions a env have
- `conda search -f pkg` - search for a package in conda.
- `conda clean` - Remove unused packages and caches.

## References

- [Managing conda channels][1]

[1]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-channels.html
